Mann ki Baat
My Dear Countrymen, 
Today is the holy festival of Vijay Dashami. My heartiest greetings on this occasion of Vijay Dashami to one and all. 
Through the medium of radio, I would like to share few heartfelt thoughts with you today. And, I hope that not only today, this series of conversation may be carried out regularly in future. I will try my best, if possible, to take out time twice a month or even once to speak with you. In future, I have also decided that whenever I will speak to you, it would be on Sundays and time would be morning 11. In that way, it would be convenient for you too and I will feel contented with the fact that I am successful in sharing my thoughts with you. 
We are celebrating the festival of Vijay Dashami today, which symbolises the triumph of Good over Evil. But one gentleman named Ganesh Venkatadari, a native of Mumbai, sent me a mail and has written to me that we must take a vow to eliminate ten bad habits from within ourselves on this occasion of Vijay Dashami. I express my gratitude to him for this recommendation. We all, as individuals, must be thinking to put an end to all our bad habits and win over them, although, with respect to our nation, I believe we all should come together and take a vow in eliminating all the dirt from our country. On this occasion of Vijay Dashami, we must take a vow to eliminate dirt and filth and we can do so on this occasion. 
Yesterday, on 2nd October on the eve of Mahatma Gandhi’s birth anniversary, more than 1.25 crore countrymen have started the ‘Swachh Bharat’ movement. I had shared one thought yesterday which is that I will nominate nine people and they need to upload their videos of cleaning the nation on social media websites, and nominating nine more people to do the same. I want you all to join me, clean the nation, and nominate nine more people to clean the nation, and those nine people must do the same. Eventually, the entire nation will have this atmosphere. I strongly believe that you all will join hands with me to carry this movement forward. 
Whenever, we think of Mahatma Gandhi, naturally we are reminded of Khaadi. You may be wearing variety of clothes with different fabrics and company brands in your family. But is it not possible to include Khaadi too? I am not telling you to use only Khaadi products. I am just insisting to use, at least one Khaadi product, like handkerchief, or a bath towel, a bed sheet, a pillow cover, a curtain or anything of that kind. If you have an inclination for all kinds of fabrics and clothes in your family, you can also buy Khaadi products on a regular basis. I am saying this as when you buy Khaadi products, it helps poor people to light lamps on Diwali. Also, you can avail a special discount on Khaadi products from 2nd October for a month. It is a very small thing, but has very big impact which binds you with the poor. How you see this as a success. When I speak of 1.25 crore countrymen and infer the outcome, we might assume that government will take care of everything and as individuals we stand nowhere. We have seen that if we intend to progress then we need to identify our potential, understand our strengths and I can swear that we form the incomparable souls of this world. You all know that our own scientists have been successful in reaching Mars, bearing least expenses. We do not lack in our strengths, but have forgotten our strong points. We have forgotten ourselves. We have become hopeless. My dear Brothers and Sisters I cannot let this happen. I always remember one of the sayings by Swami Vivekananda ji as he always used to emphasize on one thought and possibly, he might have shared this thought with many others. 
Vivekananda ii used to say, once a lioness was carrying her two cubs on the way and came upon a flock of sheep from a distance. She got a desire to prey upon them and started running towards the flock. Seeing her running, one of the cub too, joined her. The other cub was left behind and the lioness moved on, post preying upon the flock. One of the cub went with the lioness but the other cub was left behind, and was brought up by a mother sheep. He grew among the sheep, started speaking their language and adapted their ways of life. He used to sit, laugh and enjoy with them. The cub who went with the lioness, was a grown-up now. Once, he happened to meet his brother and was shocked to see him. He thought in his mind,” He is a lion and is playing with sheep, talking like sheep. What is wrong with him? He felt that his ego was at stake and went to talk to his brother. He said,” What are you doing, brother? You are a lion.” He gets a reply from his brother, “No, I am a sheep. I grew up with them. They have brought me up. Listen to my voice and the way I talk.” He said, “Come, I will show you, who you really are.” He took his brother to a well and told him to look in the water his own reflection, and asked him, if both of them had similar faces. “I am a lion, you, too, are a lion.” His brother’s self-esteem got awakened; he attained self-realization through this and even a lion brought up among sheep started roaring like a lion. His inner entity was awakened. Swami Vivekananda ji used to say the same. My countrymen, 125 crore Indians have indefinite strengths and capabilities. We need to understand ourselves. We need to identify our inner strengths and like Swami ji always used to say, we need to carry our self-respect, identify ourselves and move forward in life and be successful, which in turn, make our nation a winning and successful country. I believe, all our countrymen with a population of 125 crores are efficient, strong and can stand against any odds with confidence.
These days, I have been getting many letters through social media websites, like Facebook, from my friends. One of them, Mr. Gautam Pal, has addressed an issue regarding the specially-abled children. He has suggested forming separate Municipality, Municipal Corporation or councils for them. We need to plan something for them for enhancing their moral support. I liked his suggestion and I have experienced this during my day as Chief Minister of Gujarat. A Special Olympics was held in Athens in 2011. After the Olympics I had called all the participants and winners of specially-abled category from Gujarat to my home. I spent two hours with them, and it was the most emotional and inspiring incident of my life. As I believe, a specially-abled child is not only the responsibility of the parents in a family, it is the responsibility of the entire society. God has chosen this family to support a specially-abled child, but a child is a responsibility of the entire nation. After this incident, I got so emotionally attached with them, I started organizing separate Olympics for them in Gujarat. Thousands of children with their parents used to come and attend, I, too, used to attend the Olympics. There was an atmosphere of trust and, this is the reason, I liked the suggestion given by Mr. Gautam Pal and I felt like sharing this thought with you. 
It reminds me of another story. Once, a traveller was sitting at the corner of a road, and was asking everyone the way to a specific place. He continued asking the route from many people. A man, sitting beside him was observing him. The traveller stood up and started asking passers-by again. He stood up and said,” The way to your destination is here.” The traveller, then, said,” Brother, you were sitting next to me for so long, saw me asking everyone the route. If you knew the route, why didn’t you tell me before?” The man answered,” I was waiting to verify if you really intend to reach your destination or you are asking people just for your knowledge. But, when you stood up, I was assured that you truly wish to reach your destination, and decided to confirm the address”.
My countrymen, till the time we do not decide to walk, stand on our own, we will also not the get the guidance from others in our journey. We will not get the people to hold our hand and help us in walking. We need to take the initiative in walking and I trust all my 125 crore Indians, who are capable of walking on their own and will keep moving. 
For the past few days, I have been getting very interesting suggestions from people. I am aware, when to adapt to these suggestions. But, I want everyone to actively participate in these suggestions as we all belong to our nation, the nation does not only belong to any Government. We are the citizens of our Nation and we all need to unite without any exceptions. Some of you have suggested simplifying the registration process for Small Scale Industries. I will definitely put this under Government’s notice. Some of you have written to me to incorporate skills development courses in the school curriculum from 5th standard. This will help the students to learn various skills and crafts. I loved this effective suggestion given by them. They have also suggested that even the adults should learn skills development courses along with their studies. One of the suggestions given was to keep a dustbin at every 100 meters and a cleaning system should be established. 
Some of you have written to me, to abolish the use of plastic bags. I am receiving numerous suggestions from people. I have always been telling you, to write to me and narrate a true incident, which is positive and inspiring to me and our Countrymen, along with the evidence. If you do this, I can promise this to you, that I will share all those heartfelt thoughts or suggestions with all our Countrymen, through “Mann ki Baat”. 
I have only one intention in speaking with you all,” Come, let us serve our Mother India. Let us all take our nation to the new heights. Let us all take a step forward. If you take one step, our nation takes 125 crore steps to move forward, and for this purpose, on this auspicious occasion of Vijay Dashami, we all need to defeat all of our inner evils and decide to start doing something good for the nation. Today is the fortunate beginning for me. I will be sharing my heartfelt thoughts with one and all. Today, I have shared all the thoughts coming directly from my heart. I will meet you all next at 11 am on Sundays, but I trust our journey shall never end and will continue receiving love and suggestions from you. 
After listening to my thoughts, please do not hesitate in sharing your thoughts or advice to me, I will appreciate that your suggestions keep coming. I am glad to talk with you through this simple medium of Radio, which serves each and every corner of the nation. I can reach the poorest homes, as mine, my nation’s strength lies within the hut of Poor, within the villages; my nation’s strength lies with the Mothers, Sisters and Youths; my nation’s strength lies with the farmers. Nation will only progress, if you believe in it. I am expressing my trust towards the nation. I believe in your strength, hence, I believe in our nation’s future. 
I would once again, like to thank one and all for taking out time and listening to me. Thank you all. 
#DELIMITER#
2 10 2014, India
Launch of Swachhata mission
Following is the English rendering of the text of Prime Minister, Shri Narendra Modi at the launch of Swachhata Mission, here today.
“Bharat Mata ki Jai, Long Live Mahatma Gandhi, Long Live Lal Bahadur Shastri.
My Colleagues from Central Government, Shri Venkaiah Naidu ji and Shri Nitin Gadkari ji, dignitaries and my young friends.
Today is 2nd October, birth anniversaries of our Pujya Mahatma Gandhi and Lal Bahadur Shashtri ji. Lal Bahadur Shastri gave us the Mantra of Jai Jawan Jai Kisan. Indian Farmers filled the granaries in reply to that exhortation. Pujya Bapu gave us the message of ‘Quit India- Clean India’. Our countrymen, under the leadership of Mahatma Gandhi, freed the nation from colonialism. Bapu’s dream of cleanliness, however, remains unfulfilled.
Here, we had called for a logo and an idea through crowd-sourcing, asked the people for a tagline. Bhai Anant of Maharashtra and sister Bhagyashri won the contest. It was right to the point. I can see, that through these glasses Gandhiji is looking and asking whether we have cleaned India or not. This is not just a logo. Through these glasses he is looking, asking- what have you done? What will you do and how? By when will you do it? This is the message of the logo that has Mahatma Gandhi’s glasses. They give us the message of Clean India. I compliment the creator of this logo- Shri Anant. One tag line has been given by Bhagyashri- ‘one step towards cleanliness’. Not a big deal, just a step. For this I complement Bhagyashri.
My dear countrymen,
Today from this platform with all the authenticity, and purity at my command, India Gate is right in front of me where flame of our martyrs is burning, I swear by that, I am not making a political statement. All Governments of this country must have done their bit for this cause. Many social, cultural and religious leaders must have contributed towards this task. There may have been different people, different forms of programme, I salute all of them. I have to take this series forward. I don’t make any claim that the new Government is doing everything. I acknowledged all previous Governments from the Red Fort also. Today, from this august platform I convey my respect to all Governments whether of Centre or of State, municipal bodies, social organizations, Sarvodaya leaders, Seva Dal workers. As this holy mission is starting today, I salute every one of them and pray to all countrymen to start this programme.
Sometimes I feel that the job of getting rid of filth belongs to Safai karmchari only? Isn’t it the duty of all the 125 crore countrymen? Will we keep on imposing everything on them only? Something good happens or bad, will be keep on blaming them only? We have to change this situation. Like all 125 crore Indians the Prime Minister is also first son of Bharat Mata and Prime Minister later. Therefore, as the children of this mother, all of us are responsible that we should not keep our country like this. It may be village neighborhood, home family, school and college, Mandir, Masjid or Gurudwara; how can we keep it dirty? Wherever we see filth or see someone throwing papers why don’t we feel like picking that up? I know this will not be accomplished only by publicity campaign. Old habits take time to change. It’s a difficult task, I know. But we have till 2019 when we will observe 150th anniversary of Mahatma Gandhi.
I am grateful to my media friends who are spreading this message. If we collectively make it a people’s movement then I don’t see any reason why we will not be counted among the clean cities and nations of the world. India can also do it, Indians can do it. If Indians can reach Mars with minimum expense then can’t they clean their neighborhood? No Prime Minister or Minister took us to Mars. It was done by the scientists; children of Mother India. Cleanliness will also be achieved together.
I know, in coming days I will be criticized. Look what has been achieved? I understand lot of criticism will come my way. However, I am ready to face all the criticism for making Mother India pristine once again. I have come with the determination that 125 crore Indians will not let Mother India remain dirty. We will not leave any stone unturned to fulfill Bapu’s dreams.
I have decided to start a movement in social media also. It is there on MyGov.in website also. A new website has been created on ‘Clean India’. Work has been started on Facebook and Twitter also. #MycleanIndia was started today. I appeal all the countrymen to upload photographs of garbage, then clean that and upload the video and the photographs of the cleaned place. I also appeal to media. There are many youngsters, organizations in every nook and corner of the country. They are doing the work of cleanliness way before I became the Prime Minister. They should be brought to the limelight by Media. All common people who work for cleanliness should be highlighted. All of us should create an inspiring environment. Finger pointing will not help as I told earlier this is beyond politics. This is a work solely inspired by patriotism. We will do it with patriotic feeling. There is no place for politics. That is why I say there are many organizations and social and cultural bodies those who are working in their own way. I have seen many villages where Sarpanch is so alert and villagers keep the village in exemplary cleanliness. Many people are like that. Some of the teachers take lot of interest in keeping the premises clean, the atmosphere is kept very pure.
When we come to India Gate and go towards Rashtrapati Bhawan it feels nice to see the clean surroundings. Should not every corner of India be this clean? Isn’t this our social duty? We will do a great disservice by treating it politically or considering it a photo opportunity. Mahatma Gandhi did not go to every locality to clean up but his commitment created awareness towards cleanliness in entire India. We also have to do it together. Wherever we are, we should do it. I believe we will be able to clean our Mother India. This is a work for 125 crore Indians. In those 125 crore Indians there is a person called Modi. Not that Modi is alone but there are 125 crore Indians and I am saying it 125 crore times. This work is not only for Government or for Ministers, neither is this work only of social organizations and devoted social workers. This is a mass movement. The more we associate this with common person, the more are the chances of success.
Today Navarati is coming to an end. Tomorrow we will celebrate Vijayadashmi. I convey my best wishes to all countrymen for Vijayadashmi tomorrow.
Today, I have started a programme on social media. I have invited 9 people to come to public place and work for cleanliness. I am sure that those 9 people whom I have invited will surely do this work. Not only this, I have requested them that they should also invite 9 other people. Then 9 more. I request you also that you also upload videos of your cleanliness projects and this chain of 9 should carry on. Today, I have invited Goa Governor Hon’ble Mridula Sinha, Bharat Ratna Sachin Tendulkar, Yoga Guru Baba Ramdev, Congress leader Shri Shashi Tharoor jee, Shriman Kamal Hasan, Shriman Salman Khan, sister Priyanka Chopra and the entire team of Tarak Mehta ka Ulta Chashma. I have told them to push this through their and other serials. Our film industry will also see, in last fifty years there have been many movies where they were episodes related to cleanliness. We need to encourage this and do our duty.
Brothers and sisters there is a startling evaluation of WHO – they say that the diseases created by lack of cleanliness results in additional loss of 6500 rupees to every Indian. Due to illness someone is not able to drive taxi or auto rickshaw or not able to distribute newspapers or not able to deliver milk. This is just the average of the total loss. If we take out affluent households then burden on poor people will go up to 12-15 thousand. If we just spread cleanliness, our poor will be saved 6500 rupees. This will save him from diseases and unemployment. This movement is very important for the health of the poor. Serving Mother India is serving the poorest.
Come let’s see on MyGov.in, my Facebook or twitter, the mood that I am witnessing, the enthusiasm that I see, fills me with hope that public is ready to move hundred steps ahead of the Government. If public is moving there is no reason to stop them.
Brothers and sisters, We should gift something to Mahatma Gandhi. In 2019 when Gandhiji will turn 150, we should gift him a Swachh Bharat created with a collective responsibility. Quit India was successful due to the involvement of everyone in the freedom struggle. Success of clean India lies in the involvement of 125 crore Indians. Jai Jawan, Jai Kisan was successful as it was given by Lal Bahadur Shastri. He called for agricultural production. Nobody asked Lal Bahadur Shastri that, are you going to the fields to plough them, have you done some farming or produced some foodgrain? Nobody asked anything. But as Lal Bahadur Shastri said Jai Kisan- all the farmers stood up and filled the granaries. The momentous tasks of giving food to every poor in India was done on the words of this great man. Now, this is the time to realise Mahatma Gandhi’s words. Just look at the purity of this great man’s words, its power, its dedication: Shouldn’t this inspire us? Whether it is me or you, success of clean India will give us the same pleasure as the success of Quit India slogan. It will give us similar joy and prosperity. We have started moving ahead with our faith in the words of these great men.
Don’t put your trust on me or my Government, trust Mahatma Gandhi. Trust his sacrifice, determination and dedication. Believe in his dream of Swachh Bharat. Today this is our responsibility that if we are the children of Mother India we should not either cause filth or allow other to do it. Often when we go to foreign countries, we say how clean it was there, there was no dirt anywhere. Then I ask these people, did you like the fact that it was so clean? Then I ask, did you see anyone littering or spitting? They say, no we didn’t. Then I say that the secret of cleanliness is in the discipline of their citizens. If we manage that, I am sure we will do wonders. One more work is there – that of building toilets. In our villages more than sixty percent people are still going to toilet in open. I feel most pained that even our mothers and sisters have to go in open. We have to remove this blot. I have told corporate social responsibility people to prioritize this. We should do this much at least for the dignity of our mothers and sisters.
Even today, there are many schools which don’t have separate toilets for girls. We need to change this. It is nobody’s fault; we just need to move ahead with a positive outlook of future. There should not be any political comment by any member of this movement as everybody has work. Every one before us also worked. Under Mahatma Gandhi, Congress was at the forefront of it.
I worship this work, that is why I request specially to media and countrymen with folded hands that, associate this movement only with love for the country. Link this movement only with the worship of Mother India and with the poor and health of the poor. We should not vitiate the environment by talking about, who is doing who is not, who was successful, who was not. We should move with a sense of collective responsibility. With collective responsibility we will surely be successful.
Now I invite every one of you. We are going to take an oath here. My request is that those who are sitting should take oath sitting, no need to stand up. Those who are standing should keep on standing. My second request is that you should raise both of your hands and remember Mahatma Gandhi. Feel that this work is for building a Bharat of the dreams of Pujya Bapu. We should not just utter the words but take solemn pledge. You will take the pledge, take the movement forward and will leave no stone unturned.
Mahatma Gandhi dreamt of an India which was not only free but also clean and developed. Mahatma Gandhi secured freedom for Mother India. Now it is our duty to serve Mother India by keeping the country neat and clean.
I take this pledge that I will remain committed towards cleanliness and devote time for this. I will devote 100 hours per year that is two hours per week to voluntary work for cleanliness. I will neither litter nor let others litter. I will initiate the quest for cleanliness with myself, my family, my locality, my village and my work place.
I believe that the countries of the world that appear clean are so because their citizens don’t indulge in littering nor do they allow it to happen.
With this firms belief, I will propagate the message of Swachh Bharat Mission in villages and towns.
I will encourage 100 other persons to take this pledge which I am taking today.
I will endeavour to make them devote their 100 hours for cleanliness.
I am confident that every step I take towards cleanliness will help in making my country clean.
Jai Hind!
Long live Mahatma Gandhi
Long live Mahatma Gandhi
Long live Mahatma Gandhi
Best wishes to all!
#DELIMITER#
18 9 2014, India
Visit of President of China
President Xi Jinping, members of the media,
I am delighted to welcome President Xi Jinping to India. I am especially pleased to host him within months of the formation of my Government in Delhi.
I attach great importance and priority to our relations with China. We are two ancient civilizations with a long history of engagement. China is our largest neighour, and India`s neighbourhood occupies a special place in my national development plans and foreign policy. Today, we are the world`s two most populous countries and its two largest emerging economies. We are both undergoing economic transformation on an unprecedented scale and speed.
Therefore, a climate of mutual trust and confidence; respect for each other`s sensitivities and concerns; and, peace and stability in our relations and along our borders are essential for us to realize the enormous potential in our relations.
If we achieve that, we can reinforce each other`s economic growth. We can contribute to peace, stability and prosperity in our region. And, we can give new direction and energy to the global economy.
Over the two days in Ahmedabad and Delhi, we had opportunities to discuss the full range of issues in our relationship, including political and security issues, economic relations and people-to-people contacts. We have decided to deepen our engagement at all levels and hold regular summit level meetings.
We agreed that our economic relations do not do justice to our potential. I expressed concern at the slowdown in trade and the worsening trade imbalance. I sought his partnership in improving market access and investment opportunities for Indian companies in China. President Xi assured me of his commitment to take concrete steps to address our concerns.
I have invited Chinese investments in India`s infrastructure and manufacturing sectors and spoke about our new policies and administrative steps in this area.
I am pleased with the agreements on two Chinese industrial parks in India and a commitment to realize about 20 billion U.S. dollars of Chinese investments in the next five years. This opens a new chapter in our economic relations. We have also agreed on specific steps to enhance cooperation in upgrading India`s railways sector. We will begin the process of discussions on civil nuclear energy cooperation that will bolster our broader cooperation on energy security.
I welcome our five year economic and trade development plan as an important new step to pursue higher ambitions in our economic relations.
Our agreements and announcements today demonstrate that people-to-people contacts, culture, tourism and art are central to our efforts to strengthen our partnership.
On behalf of the people of India, I thank President Xi for opening a new route through Nathu-La to Kailash Mansarovar. This will be in addition to the existing route through Uttarakhand. The new route offers many benefits. It makes Kailash Mansarovar accessible by a motorable road, which is especially beneficial to the older pilgrims. It offers a safer alternative in the rainy season, makes the pilgrimage shorter in duration, and will enable a much higher number of pilgrims to go there.
As we discussed how to strengthen cooperation, we have also exchanged views on outstanding differences in our relationship in a spirit of candour and friendship.
I raised our serious concern over repeated incidents along the border. We agreed that peace and tranquility in the border region constitutes an essential foundation for mutual trust and confidence and for realizing the full potential of our relationship. This is an important understanding, which should be observed diligently. While our border related agreements and confidence building measures have worked well, I also suggested that clarification of Line of Actual Control would greatly contribute to our efforts to maintain peace and tranquility and requested President Xi to resume the stalled process of clarifying the LAC.
Similarly, we discussed India`s concerns relating to China`s visa policy and Trans Border Rivers. I am confident that their satisfactory resolution would take mutual trust to a new level.
We had a productive discussion on regional and international developments and agreed to strengthen our strategic dialogue on these issues. We both understand that India and China have a shared interest in a peaceful and stable region, including peace, stability and prosperity Afghanistan. We will build closer cooperation on the shared challenges of terrorism and extremism. We also agreed to cooperate on our many shared interests at the global level.
We discussed regional connectivity and the proposal for the Bangladesh, China, India and Myanmar Economic Corridor. Located at the crossroads of Asia, India believes that reconnecting Asia is important for its collective prosperity. I also believe that our efforts to rebuild physical connectivity in the region would also require a peaceful, stable and cooperative environment.
In conclusion, I would like to say that this is a historic opportunity for the relationship between India and China, filled with vast possibilities. We can start a new era in our relations. If we are sensitive to our opportunities and challenges, then I am confident that we will fulfill our responsibility to make it a great success.
Thank you
#DELIMITER#
5 9 2014, India
Interaction with students on Teacher's day
My dear students and friends from the different schools all over the country and those present in this function.
This is a moment of great happiness for me that I have got an opportunity to interact with children who are carrying dreams of future India in their eyes. Today is Teachers Day. Gradually this inspiring chapter is losing its importance, perhaps there would be many schools where 5th September is not remembered in this form. This has become limited to giving awards to teacher and having ceremonies. Need of the hour is to underline the importance of a teacher in our social life. Till the time we don’t accept this importance neither will we feel the honour for a teacher nor be successful in changing the new generation through the medium of teachers. That is why there is a need to update this great tradition and reenergise it.
There is a need for debate on the reasons why many bright students do not want to become teachers. All of us have to find the answer to this question. In a global context, it is believed that there is a great demand for teachers and good teachers are in short supply. India is a young nation. Can’t India dream of exporting teachers of high calibre? Can’t we instil this desire in the heart of today’s children that I will become a great teacher and will contribute in the progress of my country? How to rekindle this feeling. Dr. Sarvapalli Radhakrishnan has done a great service to this country. He never used to celebrate his birthday as he insisted that the birthday of a teacher should be observed. This concept of teachers’ day is now prevalent in many countries. Ask any great person in the world about the success in the life he or she will definitely tell two things. First this is my mother’s contribution and second, my teacher’s contribution. We get to hear this from about almost every great personalities. But it holds importance only to the point till we follow it diligently. There was a time when this feeling was there for a teacher. If there was one most respected figure in the entire village, it was the teacher. His word was final. Gradually this situation has changed considerably. However, we can establish it once again.
As a child, you might be having many questions. Many of you must be finding difficult to enjoy holidays and will be eagerly waiting for Monday so that you can go and tell the teacher what all was done on Sunday. Things which can’t be told to mother, brother and sister, one feels so eager to tell one’s teacher. This is the level of closeness. The same teacher changes his/her life. Teacher’s word brings the major change in the life of a student. I know of many students who talk like their teache, dress like their teacher, he is their hero. This is a stage which needs to be enlivened to strengthen our new genearation. There is a saying in China that those who think only for a year, they sow foodgrains, those who thinks for a decade, they plant fruits. But those who thinks for generations, they prepare humans. It means to educate, to imbibe culture and to prepare someone for life. How can we make our education system come alive with a zeal for life building.
I have said on 15th August that I want no school should remain without toilet for girls by the end of this year. A number of schools do not have toilets for girls. Some schools do not have toilets even for boys. Many may feel that this job is not worthy of a Prime Minister. But when I went into details, I found that this is a highly important job. However, for this I need help from every school of the country and all the teachers who are listening, for creating an enabling environment for this. I was there in Japan couple of days ago. An Indian family met me, the wife was Japanese and the husband who was Indian came to me and said that ‘I heard your Independence Day speech. You are insisting on cleanliness. There is a rule here in Japan that all of us, teachers and the students, together clean the school. Even the toilets are cleaned collectively. This is part of our character building in our school. Why is it not so in India?’ I said that I have to go back and ask mediapeople, otherwise it will run for 24 hours. Once, when I was in Gujarat, there was a programme on TV that was running that school children were cleaning the school. What kind of a school was that, what type of management was this, what teachers, exploitation of children! Anyway, I made light of that event. However, how will we make this a national trait. This can happen.
I call upon the senior people of the country. You may be doctors, lawyers, IAS officers or IPS officers. Can’t you identify a school nearby and volunteer to teach there for at least one period after deciding appropriate subject with the school. If every educated Indian volunteer for one period of teaching every week. Howsoever senior an officer, why can’t he or she can spend some time once in a week with children and teach them something. Please tell me if we agree that there are problems in the education system like lack of good teachers etc, can’t this be rectified. Why can’t we convert nation-building into a people’s movement? We should align everybody’s strength. We are not a country that should be left behind. We can go ahead a great deal. For this our emphasis should be on national character building. There should be collective efforts and this can be done.
As a student you might be having many dreams. I don’t believe that situations in life can stop anyone. If the determination is strong, then I believe that youngsters and children of this country have the strength and talent to move forward. Importance of technology is increasing day by day.
I will request all the teachers that if something is needed to be learnt, it should be learnt. We should keep on learning irrespective of our age being 40, 45 or 50. We are living with children who are growing in the age of technology. We should not keep them deprived from this. That will be a social crime. Our efforts should be that our children should be well versed with modern science and technology. The child should get ample opportunity to know the world in this form. This should be our effort.
Sometimes I ask this from children. I want to ask you also a question, will you reply? How many children sweat profusely four times in a day? How many? There is no one? If there is no sports in life, child will not bloom. This is a stage one should enjoy and spare time to sweat at least four times in a day. Will you do that? Are you sure? Your life should not be burdened with TV, books and computer. Life is also beyond these. We must have enjoyment in our lives. How many of you have hobby of reading books outside your curriculum? It seems there is a good number of such children. How many of you like to read autobiographies. It seems there are very few such children. I ask children to read biography of the person whom they like most. By reading biography we come closer to the history. We know the contemporary history by reading about the life of a person. It is not necessary that we should read a particular type of biography only. If someone wants to advance in sports he should read biography of the person from that field. If someone has done well in cinema and you get the chance to read his biography, you must read. If someone has done well in the field of business his biography should be read. It someone has worked as scientist his autobiography should be read. By reading biography we get the chance to come closer to the history and to understand what truth is. We should strive for that. Otherwise, everything is done by Google Guru and you have the habit to go to Google if you have a question. One gets the information but not the knowledge. I have been told some students have questions, I would like to chat with them. Make the atmosphere lighter, there is no need to remain serious. Your teacher might have told you not to put your hand in this manner, don’t do this. Have they told? You must follow instructions of your teacher but after leaving this place. Right now, be relaxed, then we will talk.
Again, I want to give you my best wishes. On the Teachers’ Day I salute all the teachers and give them my best wishes. Teachers have played a big role in building lives of many like us. I feel indebted for that.
Thank You
#DELIMITER#
15 8 2014, India
Independence Day
Prime Minister Shri Narendra Modi addressed the nation from the ramparts of the Red Fort on the 68th Independence Day.
Following is the English rendering of the Prime Minister’s address on the occasion:
My dear countrymen,
Today, all Indians in the country and also abroad are celebrating the festival of independence. On this day of sacred festival of independence, the prime servant of India extends greetings to all dear countrymen.
I am present amidst you not as the Prime Minister, but as the Prime Servant. The freedom struggle was fought for so many years, so many generations laid down their lives, innumerable people sacrificed their lives and youth, spent their entire lives behind bars. Today, I pay my respect, greetings and homage to all those who laid their lives for the country's independence.
I also pay my respects to the crores of citizens of this country on the pious occasion of India's independence, and recall all those martyrs who had laid down their lives in India's struggle for freedom. The day of independence is a festival when we take a solemn pledge of working for the welfare of mother India, and also for the welfare of the poor, oppressed, dalits, the exploited & the backward people of our country.
My dear countrymen, a national festival is an occasion to refine and rebuild the national character. This National festival inspires us to resolve ourselves to lead a life where our character gets refined further, to dedicate ourselves to the nation and our every activity is linked to the interest of the nation and only then this festival of freedom can be a festival of inspiration to take India to newer heights.
My dear countrymen, this nation has neither been built by political leaders nor by rulers nor by governments. This nation has been built by our farmers, our workers, our mothers and sisters, our youth. The country has reached here today because of generation to generation rigours undertaken by our sages, our saints, our maestros, our teachers, our scientists and social workers. These great people and these great generations, who had worked for the country throughout their lives, deserve our deepest respect. This is the beauty of India's Constitution, this is its capability which has made it possible that today a boy from small town, a poor family has got the opportunity to pay homage to the tri-colour of India at the ramparts of 
Lal Quila (Red Fort). This is the strength of India's democracy. This is an invaluable legacy which we have inherited from our architects of the constitution. I pay my respects to those architects of the constitution of India today.
Brothers and sisters, today if we have reached here after independence, it is because of the contribution of all the Prime Ministers, all the governments and even the governments of all the States. I want to express my feelings of respect and gratitude to all those previous governments and ex-Prime Ministers who have endeavoured to take our present day India to such heights and who have added to the country's glory.
This country has been built on such foundation of ancient cultural heritage, where we were told of only one
mantra during 
Vedic period, which is indicative of our work culture, which we have learnt, we have memorized – “
Sangachchhdhvam Samvadadhvam sam wo manansi jaanataam.” We walk together, we move together, we think together, we resolve together and together we take this country forward. Having imbibed this basic mantra, 125 crores of countrymen have taken the nation forward. Yesterday only the first Parliamentary Session of the new Government had concluded. Today, I can proudly say that the Session of Parliament reflects our thinking and it is a reflection of our intentions. We are not for moving forward on the basis of majority, we are not interested to move forward by virtue of majority. We want to move ahead on the basis of strong consensus. 
"Sangachhadhwam" and, therefore, the nation has witnessed the entire Session of Parliament. Having taken all the Parties and Opposition along while working shoulder to shoulder, we achieved an unprecedented success and the credit for this does not go to the Prime Minister alone, the credit does not go to the people sitting in the Government, the credit for this goes to the Opposition also, the credit goes to all the leaders of Opposition too and also all the Members from Opposition. From the ramparts of Red Fort, quite proudly I salute all the Members of Parliament, I also salute all the Political Parties and by virtue of their strong support, we could take some important decisions intended to take the nation forward and yesterday the Session of Parliament had concluded.
Brothers and sisters, I am an outsider for Delhi, I am not a native of Delhi. I have no idea about the administration and working of this place. I have been quite isolated from the elite class of this place but during the last two months while being an outsider, I had an insider view and I was astonished. It is not a political platform, rather it is a platform of a national policy and, therefore, my views should not be evaluated from a political perspective. I have already said, I salute all the ex-Prime Ministers and earlier governments who have brought the country thus far. But I am going to say something else and it may not be seen from political point of view. When I came to Delhi and noticed an insider view, I felt what it was and I was surprised to see it. It seemed as if dozens of separate governments are running at the same time in one main government. It appeared that everyone has its own fiefdom. I could observe disunity and conflict among them. One department is taking on the other department and taking on to the extent that two departments of the same government are fighting against each other by approaching Supreme Court.This disunity, this conflict among people of the same country! How come we can take the country forward? And that is why I have started making efforts for razing those walls; I have started making efforts at making the Government,  not an assembled entity, but an organic unity, an organic entity, a harmonious whole- with one aim, one mind, one direction, one energy. Let's resolve to steer the country to one destination. We have it in us to move in that direction. A few days back...Nowadays newspapers are full of news that Modiji's Government has come, officers are reaching office on time, offices open in time, and people get there in time. I observed that India's National newspapers, TV media were carrying these news items prominently. As the Head of the Government I could have derived pleasure in the fact that everything started going on time, cleanliness got the attention, but I was not taking pleasure, I was feeling pained. That thing, I want to tell today in public. And why, because if government officers arrive office in time, does that make a news? And if that makes news, it shows how low we have fallen. It becomes a proof of that, and that's how, brothers and sisters, the governments have run? Today  in the face of global competition,  when we have to realize the dreams of millions of Indians,  the country cannot run on the lines of " it happens", " it goes". In order to fulfil the aspirations of masses, we have to sharpen the tool called the Government machinery, we have to make it keen, more dynamic, and it is in this direction that we are working. My countrymen, it's not long since I have come from outside Delhi, but I give you an assurance that the people in the Government are very capable - from the peon to the Cabinet Secretary, everybody is capable, everybody has a power, they have experience. I want to awaken that power, I want to unite that power and want to accelerate the pace of the welfare of nation through that power and I shall definitely do it. I want to assure the countrymen that we will achieve that, we will definitely do that. I could not say this on 16th May, but today after my experience of two-two and half months, keeping the tricolor as witness, I am saying on 15th of August that it is possible, it will be achieved.
Brothers and sisters, time has come to give a serious thought to the fact that whether we have a duty to create India of the dreams of those great people who gave us freedom, whether we have a national character?
Brothers and sisters, can someone please tell me as to whether he or she has ever introspected in the evening after a full day's work as to whether his or her acts have helped the poor of the country or not, whether his or her actions have resulted in safeguarding the interest of the country or not, whether the actions have been directed in country's welfare or not? Whether it should not be the motto of one and a quarter billion countrymen that every step in life should be in the country's interests? Unfortunately, we have an environment today wherein if you approach anyone with some work, he begins by saying "what does it mean for me?" He begins by saying "what does it involve for me?" and when he come to know that it does not entail any benefit for him, immediately he says "why should I bother?" we have to rise above the feelings of "what does it mean for me" and "why should I bother". Everything is not for self interest only. There are certain things which are meant for the country and we have to refine this national character. We have to rise above the feelings of "why should I bother" and "what does it mean for me" and instead we have to think that "I am for nation's interest and in this field, I am going to lead". We have to inculcate this sentiment.
Brothers and sisters, when we hear about the incidents of rape, we hang our heads in shame. People come out with different arguments, someone indulges in psycho analysis, but brothers and sisters, today from this platform, I want to ask those parents, I want to ask every parent that you have a daughter of 10 or 12 years age, you are always on the alert, every now and then you keep on asking where are you going, when would you come back, inform immediately after you reach. Parents ask their daughters hundreds of questions, but have any parents ever dared to ask their son as to where he is going, why he is going out, who his friends are. After all, a rapist is also somebody's son. He also has parents. As parents, have we ever asked our son as to what he is doing and where he is going. If every parent decides to impose as many restrictions on the sons as have been imposed on our daughters, try to do this with your sons, try to ask such questions of them.
My dear brothers and sisters, the law will take its own course, strict action will be taken, but as a member of the society, as parents, we also have some responsibilities. If somebody tells me that those who have taken guns on their shoulders and kill innocent people are maoists, are terrorists, but they are also somebody's children. I would like to ask of such parents if they had ever asked their children as to why they were taking a wrong path. Every parent must take this responsibility, he must know that his misguided son is bent on killing innocent people. He is not able to serve himself nor his family nor the country. I want to say to those youngsters who have chosen the path of violence that whatever they are and wherever they are, it is all because of mother India only that they have got it. Whoever you are it is all because of your parents. I want to ask you to think how green, how beautiful and how beneficial this earth can become if you shoulder the plough instead of the gun which spills blood on this land. How long shall we have bloodshed on this land, how long shall we take the lives of the innocent people and what have we got after all this? The path of violence has not yielded anything to us.
Brothers and sisters, I had gone to Nepal recently. There I said something publicly to draw the attention of the whole world. There was a time when the Emperor Ashoka who had chosen the path of wars, got converted to the path of Buddha at the sight of violence. There was a time in Nepal when their youngsters had opted for the path of violence but today I witness that the same youngsters are waiting for their constitution. The same people associated with them are framing the constitution. And I further said that if Nepal could present the best example of moving from the weapons to the books then it could provide inspiration to the youngsters in the world to abandon the path of violence.
Brothers and sisters, If Nepal, land of Budha, can give message to the world then why can't India too do the same? So it's the call of the hour that we renounce the path of violence and take the path of brotherhood.
Brothers and sisters, for one reason or the other, we have had communal tensions for ages. This led to the division of the country. Even after Independence, we have had to face the poison of casteism and communalism. How long these evils will continue? Whom does it benefit? We have had enough of fights, many have been killed. Friends, look behind and you will find that nobody has benefited from it. Except casting a slur on Mother India, we have done nothing. Therefore, I appeal to all those people that whether it is the poison of casteism, communalism, regionalism, discrimination on social and economic basis, all these are obstacles in our way forward. Let's resolve for once in our hearts, let's put a moratorium on all such activities for ten years, we shall march ahead to a society which will be free from all such tensions. And you will see that how much strength we get from peace, unity, goodwill and brotherhood. Let's experiment it for once.
My dear countrymen, believe in my words, I do assure you. Shun all the sins committed so far, give up that way, follow the way of goodwill and brotherhood, and let's resolve to take the country forward. I believe we can do that.
With advancement of science, brothers and sisters, we have a  rising feeling of modernity in our mind, but what do we do? Have we ever thought what the sex ratio in the country is like? 940 girls are born against per thousand boys. Who is causing this imbalance in the society? Certainly not God. I request the doctors not to kill the girl growing in the womb of a mother just to line their own pockets.  I advise mothers and sisters not to sacrifice daughters in the hope of son. Sometimes mother-father feel tempted to have son in the hope of supporting them in old age. I am a person who has worked in public life. I have come across families with five sons, each having bungalows, access to fleet of cars, but parents are forced to live in old-age homes, Vriddhashrams.  I have seen such families. I have also seen families with only daughter as progeny, that daughter sacrifices her dreams, doesn't get married, and spends entire life in taking care of old parents.  This disparity points to female foeticide and the polluted and tainted mind the 21st century has. We will have to liberate from it, and that is message to us of this Freedom festival.
Recently Commonwealth Games were organized. Indian sportspersons brought glory to the country. Nearly 64 of our sportspersons won. Our sportspersons brought 64 medals. But of them 29 are girls. Let's feel proud and clap for them. Girls also contribute to India's fame and glory. Let's recognise it. Let's take them along, shoulder to shoulder. This way we can get over the evils that have crept in social life. Therefore, brothers and sisters, we have to proceed in that direction as a social and national character. Brothers and Sisters, Development is the only way forward for the country. Good governance is the only way. There are only these two tracks to take the country forward - good governance and development, we can move forward only by taking them with us. We wish to move forward with the intent of taking them with us. When I talk of good governance, you tell me, when I ask a person in private job, he tells that he does the job; when you ask the same from a person in government job, he says that I do the service. Both earn, but for one it is job while for the other it is service. I ask a question from all brothers and sisters in government service, whether the word “Service” has not lost its strength, its identity? Persons in government service are not doing “job”, they are doing “service”. We have to revive this feeling, we have to take this feeling forward as a national character, we have to move forward in this direction.
Brothers and Sisters, whether the citizens of the country should take steps for the welfare of the nation or not? You imagine, if this 125 crores of countrymen move one step forward, then the country moves 125 crore steps forward. The meaning of democracy is not just limited to electing a government, but its meaning is that 125 crore of citizens work together joining shoulder with the government to fulfill hopes and aspirations of the country, this is the meaning of democracy. We have to create partnership with the people. We have to proceed under Public-Private Partnership. We have to proceed along with the participation of the people. But, please tell me why our farmers commit suicide? A farmer takes loan from the moneylender, but fails to repay his loans. He takes loan for the wedding of his daughter, but fails to repay. He will have to suffer hardships during his whole life. He chooses to commit suicide. Who will save the poor families of such farmers?
Brothers and sisters, I have come here with a pledge to launch a scheme on this festival of Freedom. It will be called
'Pradhanmantri Jan-Dhan Yojana'. I wish to connect the poorest citizens of the country with the facility of bank accounts through this 
yojana. There are millions of families who have mobile phones but no bank accounts. We have to change this scenario. Economic resources of the country should be utilized for the well-being of the poor. The change will commence from this point. This 
yojana will open the window. Therefore, an account holder under 
'Pradhanmantri Jan-Dhan Yojana' will be given a debit card. An insurance of One Lakh Rupees will be guaranteed with that debit card for each poor family, so that such families are covered with the insurance of One Lakh Rupees in case of any crisis in their lives.
My brothers and sisters, it is a country of young people. The 65 percent population of the country happens to be under the age of 35 years. Our country has the largest number of youths in the world. Have we ever thought of deriving an advantage out of it? Today, the world needs a skilled workforce. Today, India also needs a skilled workforce. At times, we look for a good driver but he is not available, we look for a plumber, but he is not available. If we need a good cook, he is not available. We have young people, they are unemployed but the kind of young people we seek for are not available. If we have to promote the development of our country then our mission has to be 'skill development' and 'skilled India'. Millions and Millions of Indian youth should go for acquisition of skills and there should be a network across the country for this and not the archaic systems. They should acquire the skills which could contribute towards making India a modern country. Whenever they go to any country in the world, their skills must be appreciated and we want to go for a two pronged development. I also want to create a pool of young people who are able to create jobs and the ones who are not capable of creating jobs and do not have the opportunities, they must be in a position to face their counterparts in any corner of the world while keeping their heads high by virtue of their hard work and their dexterity of hands and win the hearts of people around the world through their skills. We want to go for the capacity building of such young people. My brothers and sisters, having taken a resolve to enhance the skill development at a highly rapid pace, I want to accomplish this.
Brothers and sisters, the world has undergone a change. My dear countrymen, the world has changed. Now India can not decide its future by remaining isolated and sitting alone in a corner. The economics of the world have changed and, therefore, we will have to act accordingly. Government have taken many decisions recently, made some announcements in the budget and I call upon the world and call upon the Indians spread world over that if we have to provide more and more employment to the youth, we will have to promote manufacturing sector. If we have to develop a balance between imports and exports, we will have to strengthen manufacturing sector. If we have to put in use the education, the capability of the youth, we will have to go for manufacturing sector and for this Hindustan also will have to lend its full strength, but we also invite world powers. Therefore I want to appeal all the people world over, from the ramparts of the Red Fort, "Come, make in India", "Come, manufacture in India". Sell in any country of the world but manufacture here. We have got skill, talent, discipline, and determination to do something. We want to give the world an favourable opportunity that come here, "Come, Make in India" and we will say to the world, from electrical to electronics, "Come, Make in India", from automobiles to agro value addition "Come, Make in India", paper or plastic, "Come, Make in India", satellite or submarine "Come, Make in India". Our country is powerful. Come, I am giving you an invitation.
Brothers and sisters, I want to call upon the youth of the country, particularly the small people engaged in the industrial sector. I want to call upon the youth working in the field of technical education in the country. As I say to the world "Come, Make in India", I say to the youth of the country - it should be our dream that this message reaches every corner of the world, "Made in India". This should be our dream. Whether, to serve the country, is it necessary for the youth of the country to be hanged like Bhagat Singh? Brothers and sisters, Lal Bahadur Shastri had given the slogan "Jai Jawan, Jai Kisan". A soldier sacrifices himself at the border and protects Mother India. Similarly, a farmer serves Mother India by filling the godowns with grains. This is also nation's service. Filling the granary is the biggest nation's service that a farmer provides. That is why Lal Bahadur Shashtri had given the slogan of "Jai Jawan, Jai Kisan".
Brothers and Sisters, I would like to pose a question to my youngsters as to why despite them, we are forced to import even the smallest of things? My country's youth can resolve it, they should conduct research, try to find out as to what type of items are imported by India and then each one should resolve that, through may be micro or small industries only, he would manufacture atleast one such item so that we need not import the same in future. We should even advance to a situation wherein we are able to export such items. If each one of our millions of youngsters resolves to manufacture atleast one such item, India can become a net exporter of goods. I, therefore, urge upon the youth, in particular our small entrepreneurs that they would never compromise, atleast on two counts. First, zero defect and, second again zero effect. We should manufacture goods in such a way that they carry zero defect, that our exported goods are never returned to us. We should manufacture goods with zero effect that they should not have a negative impact on the environment. If we march ahead with the dream of zero defect in the manufacturing sector then, my brothers and sisters, I am confident that we would be able to achieve our goals.
Brothers and sisters, the youth of India has completely transformed the identity of India in the world. Earlier, in what manner did the world know our country?  Till only 25-30 years back, if not more, there were many people in the world who thought that India was a country of snake charmers, it was a country which practiced in black magic. The real identity of India had not reached the world, but my dear brothers and sisters, our youngsters, 20-22-23 years old youngsters have mesmerized the whole world with their skills in computers. Our young I.T. professionals have given a new path of making a new identity of India. If our country has this strength, can we think something about the country? Our dream is, therefore, of "Digital India". When I talk of "Digital India", I don't speak of the elite, it is for the poor people. You can imagine what a quality education the children in villages will get, if all the villages of India are connected with Broadband Connectivity and if we are able to give long distance education to the schools in every remote corner of the villages. If we create a network of telemedicine in the places where there is a shortage of doctors, we can have a clear guideline of the way in which health facilities have to be provided to the poor people living in those areas. The citizens of India have mobile phones in their hands, they have mobile connectivity, but can we walk in the direction of mobile governance? We have to move in a direction where every poor person is able to operate his bank account from his mobile, is able to demand various things from the government, can submit applications, can conduct all his business, while on the move, through mobile governance and if this has to be done, we have to move towards 'digital India' and if we have to move towards 'digital India' then we have a dream. Today we are importing electronic goods on a large scale. Friends, you will be surprised that we are bringing in these televisions, mobile phones, i-pads and all these electronic goods. It is a necessity to import petroleum products, oil, diesel and petrol. Second to this is the import of our electronic goods. If we move ahead with the dream of 'digital India' to manufacture electronic goods and become self reliant at least there, how big can be the benefit for the treasury! Therefore, e-governance is what we need to take this idea of 'digital India' forward. E-governance is easy governance, effective governance and also economic governance. E-governance paves the way for good governance. There was a time when we used to say that the railways provided connectivity to the country. That was it. I say that today it is IT that has the potential to connect each and every citizen of the country and that is why we want to realise the mantra of unity with the help of 'digital India'.
Brothers and sisters, if we move ahead with all this then I believe that a 'digital India' will have the potential to stand with the world on equal footing. Our youth have that capability, it is an opportunity for them.
Brothers and sisters, we want to promote tourism. Tourism provides employment to the poorest of the poor. Gram seller earns something, auto-rickshaw driver earns something, pakoda seller earns something and tea seller also earns something. When there is talk of tea seller, I feel a sense of belongingness. Tourism provide employment to the poorest of the poor. But there is a big obstacle in promoting tourism and in our national character and that is - the filthiness all around us. Whether after independence, after so many years of independence, when we stand at the threshold of one and half decade of 21st century, we still want to live in filthiness? The first work I started here after formation of Government is of cleanliness. People wondered whether it is a work of a Prime Minister? People may feel that it is a trivial work for a Prime Minister but for me this a big work. Cleanliness is very big work. Whether our country can not be clean? If one hundred and twenty five crore countrymen decide that they will never spread filthiness, which power in the world has ability to spread filthiness in our cities and villages? Can't we resolve this much?
Brothers and sisters it will be 150th birth anniversary of Mahatma Gandhi in 2019. How do we celebrate 150th birth anniversary of Mahatma Gandhi? Mahatma Gandhi, who gave us freedom, who brought so much honour to such a big country in the world, what do we give to Mahatma Gandhi? Brothers and Sisters, Mahatma Gandhi had cleanliness and sanitation closest to his heart. Whether we resolve not to leave a speck of dirt in our village, city, street, area, school, temple, hospital, and what have you,  by 2019 when we celebrate 150th anniversary of Mahatma Gandhi? This happens not just with the Government, but with public participation. That's why we have to do it together.
Brother and Sisters, we are living in 21st century. Has it ever pained us that our mothers and sisters have to defecate in open? Whether dignity of women is not our collective responsibility? The poor womenfolk of the village wait for the night; until darkness descends, they can't go out to defecate. What bodily torture they must be feeling, how many diseases that act might engender. Can't we just make arrangements for toilets for the dignity of our mothers and sisters? Brothers and Sisters, somebody might feel that a big festival like 15th August is an occasion to talk big. Brothers and Sisters, talking big has its importance, making announcements too has importance, but sometimes announcements raise hopes and when the hopes are not fulfilled, the society sinks into a state of despondency. That's why are in favour of telling those things, which we can fulfil just within our sight. Brothers and sisters, you must be getting shocked to hear the Prime Minister speaking of cleanliness and the need to build toilets from the ramparts of the Red Fort. Brothers and sisters, I do not know how my speech is going to be criticised and how will people take it. But this is my heartfelt conviction. I come from a poor family, I have seen poverty. The poor need respect and it begins with cleanliness. I, therefore, have to launch a 'clean India' campaign from 2nd October this year and carry it forward in 4 years. I want to make a beginning today itself and that is - all schools in the country should have toilets with separate toilets for girls. Only then our daughters will not be compelled to leave schools midway. Our parliamentarians utilizing MPLAD fund are there. I appeal to them to spend it for constructing toilets in schools for a year. The government should utilise its budget on providing toilets. I call upon the corporate sector also to give priority to the provision of toilets in schools with your expenditure under Corporate Social Responsibility. This target should be finished within one year with the help of state governments and on the next 15th August, we should be in a firm position to announce that there is no school in India without separate toilets for boys and girls.
Brothers and sisters, if we proceed with the dreams, we are in a position to realise them. Today, I wish to tell one more specific thing. It has its own importance to discuss the matters and express the views of nation's interest. However, our Members of Parliament do not get opportunity though they are willing to do something. They can express themselves, write to the government, agitate, give memoranda. Still they do not get opportunity to do something on their own. Today I have come to you with a new idea. We are running so many schemes in the name of the Prime Minister in our country, there are numerous schemes in the name of various leaders. However, today I am going to announce a scheme on behalf of the Member of Parliament- 
'Sansad Aadarsh Gram Yojana'. We shall fix some parameters. I urge upon the Members of Parliament to select any one of the villages having population of three to five thousand in your constituency. The parameters will be according to the time, space and situation of that locality. It will include the conditions of health, cleanliness, atmosphere, greenery, cordiality etc. On the basis of those parameters, each of our MPs should make one village of his or her constituency a Model Village by 2016. Can't we do at least this? Shouldn't we do this? If we have to build a nation, we should start from the village. Make a Model Village. The reason of fixing this target for 2016 is that it is a new scheme. It takes time to formulate a scheme and then to implement it. After 2016, select two more villages for this purpose, before we go for the General Elections in 2019. And after 2019, each Member of Parliament, during his/her tenure of 5 years must establish at-least five model villages in his/her area. I also call upon the Members of Parliament from urban areas to adopt one village of their choice. I also urge upon the Members of Parliament from Rajya Sabha to adopt one of the villages. If we provide one model village in each district of India then the surrounding villages shall be automatically inspired to follow that model. Let us establish a model village, let us establish a village well equipped with all systems and facilities. The birth anniversary of Jai Prakash Narayan Ji happens to be on 11th October. On 11th October, the occasion of birth anniversary of Jai Prakash Narayan Ji, I will present a complete blueprint of 
"S
ānsad Adharsh Gr
ām Yojana" (Members of Parliament Model Village Scheme) before all Members of Parliament and State Governments, and I urge upon State Governments also that as per the feasibility in their respective states, all the Members of Legislative Assembly resolve to establish a model village. You can imagine all the Members of Legislative Assembly and all the Members of Parliament in the country establishing a model village. All of a sudden, there would be a model village in each block of India which could inspire us to transform the amenities in rural areas and could give us a new direction and, therefore, we want to move ahead under this
"S
ānsad Adarsh Gr
ām Yojana".
My dear brothers and sisters, ever since our government has taken charge, there has been a discussion in the newspapers, on T.V. channels as to what would happen to Planning Commission. I believe that when Planning Commission was constituted, it was done on the basis of the circumstances and the needs of those times. In recent years, Planning Commission has contributed to the growth of the country in its own way. I respect that, I am proud of that, but the prevalent situation in the country is different, global scenario has also changed, governments are no longer the centre of economic activities, the scope of such activities has broadened. State governments have been at the center of development and I consider this a good indication. If we have to take India forward, it can happen only be taking the states forward.  India's federal structure is more important today than in the last 60 years. To strengthen our federal structure, to make our federal structure vibrant, to take our federal structure as a heritage of development, a team of Chief Minister and Prime Minister should be there, a joint team of the Centre and the states should move forward, then to do this job, we will have to think about giving the Planning Commission a look. So, I am saying from the rampart of the Red Fort that it is a very old system and it will have to be rejuvenated, it will have to be changed a lot. Sometimes it costs more to repair the old house, but, it gives us no satisfaction. Thereafter, we have a feeling that it would be better to construct a new house altogether and therefore within a short period, we will replace the planning commission with a new institution having a new design and structure, a new body, a new soul, a new thinking, a new direction, a new faith towards forging a new direction to lead the country based on creative thinking, public-private partnership, optimum utilization of resources, utilization of youth power of the nation, to promote the aspirations of state governments seeking development, to empower the state governments and to empower the federal structure. Very shortly, we are about to move in a direction when this institute would be functioning in place of Planning Commission.
Brothers and sisters, today, on 15th August, we also have the birth anniversary of Maharishi Aurobindo. Maharishi Aurobindo, being a rebel, moved on to achieve the status of a Yoga Guru. With regard to the destiny of India, he remarked, "I have a faith that the divine power and spiritual heritage of India will play an important role towards the welfare of the world." Such sentiments were echoed by Maharishi Arvind. I strongly believe in the words of legends. I have great faith in the statements made by ascetics, sages & saints and that’s why today at the ramparts of Lal Quila I am reminded of the words of Swami Viveknanda. He had said - "I can see before my eyes Mother India awakening once again. My Mother India would be seated as the World Guru. Every Indian would render service towards welfare of humanity. This legacy of India would be useful for the welfare of the world". These words were spoken by Swami Viveknanda ji in his own style. Friends, the words of Viveknanda ji can never be untrue. The words of Viveknanda ji, his dream of seeing India ensconced as World Guru, his vision, it is incumbent upon us to realize that dream. This capable country, blessed with natural bounty, this country of youth can do much for the world in the coming days.
Brothers and sisters, our foreign policy is a much talked about issue. I clearly believe that India's foreign policy can be multi-dimensional. But there is an important issue to which I want to draw your attention that the way we fought for freedom, we fought together, we were not separate at that time. We were together. Which was the government with us? What were the weapons available to us? There was a Gandhi, a Sardar and lakhs of freedom fighters and such a huge empire. Didn't we win in the struggle of freedom against that empire? Did we not defeat the foreign powers? Did we not force them to leave India? We were the ones, they were our ancestors only who showed this might. If the people of India could remove such a big empire without the power of the government, without weapons and even without resources, then friends, it is the need of the hour to eradicate poverty, can we not overcome poverty? Can we not defeat poverty? My 125 crore dear countrymen, let us resolve to eradicate poverty, to win against it. Let us move with the dream of poverty eradication from India. Our neighbouring countries are also faced with the same problem. Why not get together with all the SAARC nations to plan out the fight against poverty? Let's fight together and defeat poverty. Let us see at-least for once as to how wonderful is the feeling of being alive instead of killing and getting killed. This is the land where incidents from Siddharth's life happened. One bird was shot with an arrow by one brother and the other took out that arrow to save it. They went to mother- whose bird, whose swan? Whether killer's or saviour's, they asked of mother. The mother replied, saviour's. The saviour has more power than the killer and that makes him Buddha in future. And that's why I seek cooperation from neighbouring countries for fighting against poverty in concert and cooperate with them, so that together with SAARC countries we can create our importance and emerge as a power in the world. It is imperative that we work together with a dream to win a fight against poverty, shoulder to shoulder. I went to Bhutan, Nepal, all the dignitaries from SAARC countries took part in oath-taking ceremony; this marked a good beginning. This will definitely yield good results, it is my belief and this thinking of India, in the country and the world, that we want to do well to the countrymen and be useful for the welfare of the world, India wants such a hand to be extended. We are trying to move forward with these dreams to achieve them.
Brothers and Sisters, today on 15th August we will resolve to do something for the country. Let's be useful for the country, we will move ahead with a resolve to take the country forward, and I assure you, Brothers and Sisters, as well as my colleagues in the Government, that if you work for 12 hours, I will do so for 13 hours. If you work for 14 hours, I will do for 15 hours. Why? Because I'm amidst you not as a Prime Minister, but as the first servant. I have formed the Government not as a ruler, but as a servant. Brothers and sisters, I assure that this country has a destiny. It is destined to work for the welfare of the world, it was said by Vivekanand ji. India is born, this Hindustan is born in order to achieve this destiny. One hundred and twenty five crore countrymen have to move forward wholeheartedly for the welfare of the nation.
Once again I feel proud of the devotion, the sacrifices of the security forces of the country, para-military forces of the country, all the security forces of the country to protect Mother India. I say to the countrymen, "राष्ट्रयाम, जाग्रयाम् वयम्", "Eternal vigilance is the price of liberty". The army is vigilant, we should also be vigilant and the country scales new heights, we have to move forward with this resolution. Speak loudly with me with full force -
Bharat mata ki jai, bharat mata ki jai, bharat mata ki jai.
Jai Hind, Jai Hind, Jai Hind.
Vande Mataram, Vande Mataram, Vande Mataram!
#DELIMITER#
12 8 2014, India
Outstanding Parliamentary Awards Ceremony
His Excellency President of India, respected Vice President, respected Speaker, Respected Manmohan Singh ji, respected Advani ji, all present respected senior gentlemen, brothers and sisters. I heartily congratulate all the three great gentlemen who are being felicitated for their excellent work. I am hopeful that this tradition being followed for the past few years will inspire all the parliamentarians. Each one will feel that in their respective roles as parliamentarians one should try and achieve high levels of conduct, depth in speech and clarity in thought as maintained by these great senior members. These kinds of thoughts would inspire all new members like us.
I agree that there are lot of intellectual talent in the house and I see people who are capable of presenting their word beautifully but the house cannot run as an ornate articulation or as a remarkable art of presentation. Till there is a seamless integration of leadership, duty and oration, just the words will fail to make an impact on the house or inspire the nation. And so those who won these awards today are the ones who have not only been good orators but are equally capable leaders and dutiful members. The country expects a lot from the Parliament of India. We give the awards within the parliament, But sometime there should be a public survey, on how the public rates the house and in a very professional way the public opinion should be presented. How does the common man view the entire house, what does he feel, maybe that may inspire us to think our way forward. 
I would request the speaker to call the speakers of all Vidhan Sabhas if possible and start this tradition in the state assemblies too. I think this will be a good step that we can take. Another thing I would like to point out is that when I was in the Vidhan Sabha and now for some time when I have been in Parliament, the humour and sarcasm which was an explicit feature is now missing, something that we have heard and read so much about. It has practically vanished from our party system. One reason someone makes a remark, then how will those who are on air 24 hours interpret it and will they debate this for 24 hours. So, the ones who can speak are scared and I think we need to seriously contemplate on this.
I have heard of old incidents, of which I remember two or three episodes. Once there was a programme in the house to commemorate the 50 years of Independence. I had come to the house to hear it and some debate was going on and probably Sharad Pawar ji spoke first and then Sushma ji spoke. She joked and said “I don’t understand whether it is Sharad Pawar or Lalita Pawar”. The way I saw that scene, the way Sharad Pawar enjoyed that jibe, such a holy atmosphere prevailed. And that remark was not blown out of proportion by anyone in the print media or the electronic media. There is a casual sense of humour in our Parliament. And as our honourable Speaker and Arun Jaitely ji mentioned, sharp words can get you 24 hour footage but it can neither be effective nor inspirational. 
That does not mean that everything should be done sweetly. That is not what I am saying. The need of the hour is to present the Parliament in a way that it becomes inspirational for the future generations. Every sentence uttered in the Parliament has its value, that it should not be undignified. And this is a collective responsibility. This is our collective responsibility, it is not about this political party, that political party, or about this or that specific individual but it is about our collective responsibility. 
Dr. Karan Singh is a very experienced individual. He is still bound by the cultural traditions. Whatever disappointments he has shared, I am sure they will be helpful in self introspection. For a distinguished person like him who for so many years has served the nation through this Parliament, to know his pain, to understand his disappointment and then to modulate as per his hopes and expectations will usher in a new dignity in the house. I congratulate these three dignitaries once again. 
I am new to the parliament. I also have to learn a lot. There are so many senior members, and by hearing them and understanding their views, I too will gain something. Sharad Ji said that once if he sits down to chat with the President he does not feel like getting up. I am telling you the truth. He gives such a lot of information with date and time and name, it is surprising. Like Sharad ji said, he wonders what kind of software does the President has in his mind. He said that what one would gain after reading an entire book, more than that one would have acquire half of the knowledge about India can be understood by having a conversation with him. Every parliamentarian should have the intention to remember dates, events, analysis of the situation and an ability to grasp things. All these can be learned from these seasoned members. And it is true that “Clarity of the Thought, Faith in Conviction and Correction in Acts” can help us take the dignity of the Parliament to a new level. I congratulate you once again. 
Thank You!
#DELIMITER#
12 8 2014, India
Address to soldiers, officers, warriors at Leh
National Security Advisor Shri Ajit Doval ji, Chief of Army Staff General Dalbir Singh ji, Lieutenant General Hooda ji, Air Marshal Soman ji and all the brave officers and soldiers of the army and air force present here. I am privileged to address those who are associated with defence forces and I believe in military, bravery is respected more than the position one holds.
Army follows a hierarchical system but courage is a tradition and for those who serve this tradition in an exemplary manner particularly wait for that moment when they will be called for serving their nation and they live for that tradition every moment. This in itself is a distinct feeling. For the soldiers, there is only one yearning in life, to work and serve the country. You can see a feeling of restlessness in a soldier who has retired from army but has not faced any challenges during his service and if fielded a similar question about his service in army. He will tend to think that though he has participated in the daily parade but has not contributed to the force. For him in his heart the meaning of work in the army is not to kill someone or to be killed, the biggest inspiration for a soldier is to dedicate his life for someone else’s life.
The respect of your mother who gave birth to you is million times more than what you can have. I salute those mothers who gave birth to such brave warriors and instilled the right values in them and also instilled a do and die inspiration for their motherland India. I am not aware of a single mother who has feeling in her heart that though she has given birth to a son but he dedicates his life only for serving motherland India and not his own mother. This extraordinary inspiration can only be given by a mother and due to this your life not only secures our national borders but also provides assurance of security to 125 million people. If you ask what are the dreams of those 125 million people then they will say that our motherland should either become a Vishwa Guru (Teacher of the World) or a Jagat Janani (Provider of the World). Our 125 million brothers and sisters want to live a happy and peaceful life, even poorest of the poor child should not sleep hungry at night and at least there should be one roof above their head with a proper access to education. That is the reason I am saying that you all are not just for protection of border or for the protection of geographical structure. Your life in an indirect way is the guarantee of millions of life. And until there is peace and security in the country development is impossible.
The preconditions of development are peace, security, brotherhood, goodwill. Our army is an example of brotherhood - there is no distinction on the basis of language, wealth and there is a feeling of being a family. The term Fauji (soldier) in itself seems like you are a very own part of the system which you can relate to and this honour does not come overnight.  These get developed under a certain tradition and this feeling comes when every moment this tradition is kept alive.
An army cannot be made capable unless the systems behind it are well accomplished. The term planning here is not restricted to the cantonment or the government, but also towards his village and family which particularly need to be strengthened. The soldier must have faith that even if he sacrifices his life for the country, the country will take care of his family and leave any stone unturned for his family’s well-being. It is the responsibility of the country and government that the faith vested in it should not be shaken. There should not be any question mark in the mind of the soldier posted on the border.
In the political field, I used to work for an organization. I came quite late in the world of electoral politics and governance. I have utlilised my earlier life in mobilizing the cadres. Whenever I addressed my party workers, I used to tell them because we live in an atmosphere of electoral politics, party workers tend to seek ticket for election and if they are denied the same they ought to get frustrated due to it and feeling of even doing something incorrect creeps inside the mind. This is a normal course of political field.  During training, I used to tell my party workers a story, which I want to share with you all. I used to tell them that when an army soldier wants to take leave on the occasion of festival of Raksha Bandhan (sister tying rakhi or a thread at the wrist of her brother for her protection). He is normally sanctioned the leave at the last moment.  He somehow packs his round luggage and rushes for his home. In order to reach the nearest railway station, he takes whatever first mode of transport comes his way, whether its truck or tempo. Due to last minute rush, the passengers do not allow him to enter in a coach as he does not have reservation for travel. You can image the similar scenario of fight everyday at Jammu station.  The soldier does not get a place to sit as people here are used to soldiers on a daily basis so he stands for twenty four hours, thirty hours, sixty hours on the train without reservation to reach home. If in some case, he misses the train though he has left with the dream of getting rakhi tied by his sister but reaches home a day late. In the interim before he reaches home due to delay his sister is waiting and the soldier travelling in the train has the image of his sister. He can see the Rakhi but cannot not reach home on time and feels mental agony. When he reaches home, his mother, daughter, sister… all are crying and upon tying of Rakhi, there is a sense of happiness. Mother is sick so he tries to extend his leave but leave is not approved, so he comes back and resumes duty. Mother has to be operated he goes again. For operation he wanders from the house of one doctor to other and the doctor demands money in advance. He does not have so much of money with him. At that time, the he is annoyed. Can he not see, I am a soldier serving my nation and here my mother is dying and he is not doing the operation for want of money? Child wants to go to school but the school is not giving him admission. A soldier wants his child to get a good education even though he has studied in a simple school but the school wants ex amount of fee to admit the child. He is very annoyed, when he thinks about the doctor who has not treated his mother, towards the school who denied admission to his child and towards the rail system which does not allow him to reach on time on the occasion of Rakhi. When he gets the news, that his mother was not operated and she died, so many negative things cross his mind. If he analyzes the event one by one, then he feels, for whom should I lay my life? Should I die for the people, who are not admitting my child to the school? These are the people who were not performing the operation in hospital, when my mother was dying, why should I lay my life for them? After seeing all this also just see the strength of the soldier, see his temperament, see his upbringing, whenever the situation arises and the bugle rings, he still puts the gun on his shoulder and says ”Bharat Maata Ki Jai’’ (hail Mother India) and marches ahead. He never thinks, what the Doctor did to his mother, what the teacher did to his child or whether he reached on time on the day of Rakhi or not, he chants the mantra of Love Live Mother India and marches forward to the action scene. This is not a small gesture, this is not an usual thing. I would tell my party workers that we must take inspiration from these soldiers. These soldiers never get the respect and honour that they deserve but when it is required they serve their ‘Motherland India’ they put the gun on their shoulders, chant ”Bharat Maata Ki Jai’’ (hail Mother India) and march ahead. This temperament, this strength is essential for the protection of dignity, self-esteem and the pride of the nation and India takes pride in the fact that we have such an outstanding army.
Whether it is navy, land or air, we have a chain of proud, daredevil, devout, soldiers who are ready to sacrifice their lives and this brings a sense of pride in us. Whenever, I come to meet them, I get an inspiration to serve my country even more. I have not come here to tell you all this, I used to be amongst you all when I was the Chief Minister of Gujarat, as I used to visit the border to celebrate Diwali there. I went there not to tell anything to them but to get my battery of patriotism charged a little more, because I know your life will provide us the inspiration. Army soldiers do not want to distance themselves from the society in general but want to have coordination with them and that gives strength. Had there been no coordination between the people of Leh and Ladakh and the army soldiers and had a Tashi-Nagia shepherd who herds cow and sheep not met an army officer then we would have not known of the Kargil infiltration of the Pakistan army for a long time. Due to the information received from a local shepherd who grazed cow, buffalo and goat informed army soldiers, awakening the nation about the impending war which we resultantly won.
In today’s age, the wars on the fought on the borders have almost stopped. It is our misfortune that that our given our neighbour’s mentality of having lost the strength to fight a conventional war but the chain of killing innocent civilians continues unabated through the Proxy War waged. How many innocent people are being killed due to this? These cowards have forced our soldiers to sacrifice their lives due to this proxy war than fighting the actual war. The proxy war is not just a crisis in India but it has engulfed the whole world. Therefore, as much there is a need for military power in the world, the requirement of humanitarian forces to come together against this menace is important. The more world's humanitarian powers come together, more they will be able to alienate the violent forces, the humanitarian forces will defeat the violent forces. We are dedicated to the protection of humanitarian thoughts, humanitarian values, humanitarian strengths and the civilized tradition.  And for this India is bound by its words, duty and commitment and we want to move forward with this belief.
You might have seen the new budget, the "One Rank, One Pension’’ scheme showed our commitment and made you happy. After independence the soldiers of our country were awaiting for the National War Memorial to be constructed. I promise you that it will be made and it will be made with lot of honour and pride and millions of people from India will take inspiration from it. It is for those people who lived for us and died for us and this will continue to inspire us forever. Our armed forces should be modern and our armed forces should not lack any required resources and India should become self-reliant in the field of security. I have taken a very big decision in the budget for it. Why can’t we arrange to make everything within India than bringing them from outside our country? In defence, FDI should come, new technology should come and the defence equipment should be made in India utilizing our current serving defence personnel that include engineers, technical staff and skilled personnel.  We are working towards the deployment of retired defence personnel in the defence manufacturing system to utilize their strength, on how to utilize the foreign funds and how to provide the best of best defence safeguard mechanism and we are moving towards it in a much planned way.
I once again, through this brave soldier in whose name this building has been named convey my respect and tribute to all the martyrs. I am proud of your duty, skill and courage and as your leader, I assure you that this country is for you and will always be proud of your sacrifice and timeless effort. My best wishes to you all. Please speak after me – Long Live Mother India, Vande Matram, Vande Mataram, Vande Mataram, Vande Mataram, Vande Mataram, Vande Mataram!
#DELIMITER#
2 8 2014, India
Prior to Nepal Visit
I am visiting Nepal from 3 to 4 August 2014 at the invitation of the Government of Nepal. I am excited about my visit and pleased that I am able to go there within weeks of assuming office as Prime Minister. 
My visit reflects our shared heritage of nature, history, culture, spiritualism and religion. It highlights the high priority that my Government attaches to our relations with Nepal and our determination to take our relationship to an entirely new level. 
My visit will be the first bilateral visit by an Indian Prime Minister to Nepal in 17 years. 
I was delighted that Prime Minister Sushil Koirala had graced my swearing in ceremony with his presence, which demonstrated the solidarity of the people of Nepal with India and our shared commitment to democracy. The India-Nepal Joint Commission Meeting chaired by our respective Foreign Ministers also met recently after a long gap of 23 years and reviewed the entire gamut of our bilateral relations and cooperation with a focus on economic relations, trade and connectivity. 
During my visit, I will have the opportunity to hold detailed discussions with the Nepalese leadership on the entire gamut of bilateral relations. I look forward to working with the leadership of Nepal to forge a new relationship for the new century between our two rapidly transforming countries. 
We will identify steps to strengthen our bilateral cooperation in key sectors, including trade and investment, hydro power, agriculture and agro-processing, environment, tourism, education, culture and sports. I will also discuss with Nepali leadership and their business leaders how we can harness the full potential of the new digital age to empower and create new opportunities for the youth of the two countries. 
Nepal has made admirable progress in its peace process and political transition towards a multiparty democracy. The successful conduct of the Constituent Assembly-cum-Parliamentary elections in November 2013 is yet another tribute to the sagacity of the Nepalese leadership and the people of Nepal. I am truly grateful to the people and the elected representatives of Nepal for giving me the rare honour of addressing the Parliament of Nepal. 
As a close friend and neighbour, we have had the privilege of being a leading partner in Nepal`s socio-economic development. We are committed to continuing our support to Nepal in its development efforts. Our ongoing major projects for development of border infrastructure will usher in economic prosperity to people living on both sides of the border and also enhance connectivity. During the visit, we will explore the ways to further strengthen our development cooperation. 
I will also discuss with the Nepalese leadership the steps to further strengthen people-to-people contacts between our countries, and how to connect lives across our open borders more seamlessly, particularly among the youth. 
I hope my visit will open a new chapter in India -Nepal relations, characterized by more frequent political engagement and closer cooperation across the full spectrum of our extraordinarily broad-based relations, which will serve as a model and catalyst for South Asian partnership for prosperity. 
#DELIMITER#
16 7 2014, Brazil
BRICS Summit, meeting with South American leaders
Your Excellencies, the Presidents of BRICS countries 
Your Excellencies, the Presidents of South American Countries 
Distinguished Delegates 
I thank Brazil, for providing this opportunity, to interact with leaders, from South American countries. I am grateful, to Your Excellencies, for sparing your valuable time, to meet us today. South America, has tremendous potential. It is blessed, with vast resources and talent. It can become an important pillar of the global economy. In the face of economic uncertainty its growth can be crucial for global prosperity. In a globalised and inter-connected world, our destinies are inter-linked. We are all bound, by shared aspirations and common challenges. We all have a stake in each other's success. Distance is not a barrier to opportunities. It also does not, insulate us from challenges in other parts of the world. 
Thus, we must all unite: 
To seek faster growth and newer avenues of generating prosperity. 
To find solutions to the challenge of poverty. 
To preserve our environment, and use our resources well. 
Our discussions today should throw up new ideas for partnership between BRICS and South America. BRICS nations have already started a new chapter in this with the BRICS New Development Bank. This will open up newer opportunities of cooperation. 
Excellencies, India and South America share a deep bond. 
Authors and poets, like Octavio Paz, Gabriel Garcia Marquez and Pablo Neruda are popular in India. Similarly, our national poet, Rabindranath Tagore, is widely loved here. South America is also home to a large number of Indians, many of whom came centuries ago. Generations later, they remain a strong bridge of friendship, between our nations. 
Prime Minister, Shri Narendra Modi meeting the President of the Republic of Peru, Mr. Ollanta Humala
Prime Minister, Shri Narendra Modi meeting the President of the Republic of Peru, Mr. Ollanta Humala

My own home state of Gujarat has many links with South America:
Ages ago, the Gir cow made its way from Gujarat, all the way to Brazil. Today Gujarat accounts for more than half of India's trade, with this wonderful continent.
Excellencies, as Chief Minister of Gujarat, I also had the privilege, to interact with your Ambassadors in Delhi. 
Prime Minister, Shri Narendra Modi meeting the President of Co-operative Republic of Guyana, Mr. Donald Ramotar

I was struck by their warmth, and their keen desire to forge closer relations, between India and South America. 
I assure you that India will work more closely with South America than ever before. At the bilateral level, as a BRICS member, in the G-77, as well as other international forums. 
Excellencies, India's trade with South America, has shown strong growth in recent years. 
Prime Minister, Shri Narendra Modi meeting the President of the Republic of Suriname, Mr. Desi Bouterse

There is a growing presence, of Indian investors in South America. It is, however, still well below potential. From hydrocarbons to pharma, textiles to leather, engineering goods to automobiles; the range of opportunities is enormous.We must utilize, the Preferential Trade Agreement between India and the MERCOSUR Trade Block, and Chile, more effectively. We also attach importance, to the South American and Caribbean Business Conclave held every year in India. A similar Investment Conclave, is being organized in October 2014, in India. I ask your Excellencies, to encourage your business leaders, to take full advantage of this opportunity. 
I firmly believe, the possibilities of cooperation are limited not by distance but only by our imagination and efforts.We have much to learn from each other, in our journey towards inclusive and sustainable development. We must share with each other, our experiences, best practices and innovative solutions. India stands committed to the same. I am pleased, that India has deputed experts, to countries in the South American region in the fields of Agriculture, Horticulture, Disaster Management, Communications and Law. We are also working together in Renewable Energy.
Almost 250 students from South America, have been taking courses in India every year under our International Technical and Economic Cooperation program. I however believe, that this is not enough. We intend to substantially increase the same.
To share India's expertise in Information Technology, we will establish Centres of Excellence in Information Technology, in South American countries.
India also offers to expand cooperation, in areas like Tele-medicine, Tele-education and e-Governance. We extend our Space capabilities, for weather forecasting, resource mapping and disaster management. Our ongoing Parliament session in Delhi – my Government's first – prevents me from spending more time here, on this visit. But, I look forward to returning to this great continent; of beauty, opportunities and warm people. I also look forward, to a much more intensive level of engagement, between India and South America, in the coming years, across all domains of cooperation 
Thank you.
#DELIMITER#
16 7 2014, Brazil
BRICS Summit
Your Excellency, President Dilma Rousseff 
Your Excellency, President Vladimir Putin 
Your Excellency, President Xi Jinping 
Your Excellency, President Jacob Zuma 
Distinguished delegates, ladies, and gentlemen 
I am delighted to be in Brazil. I thank President Rousseff, the Government, and the wonderful people of Brazil for their hospitality. 
This is my first BRICS summit and it has been a truly enriching experience. I have gained a lot from the insight and vision of the World Leaders gathered here. 
I have also had the privilege of sowing the seeds of personal relationships with each of the leaders. I look forward to seeing them blossom into deep and strong personal bonds in the days to come. 
Excellencies, BRICS enters the second cycle of its summits today. 
This Summit takes place at a crucial juncture. The World is facing a high level of economic and political turmoil. Conflict and instability is growing in many key regions. 
This increases the challenges of tackling poverty, making growth more inclusive, and evolving a sustainable model of development. 
Restoring a climate of peace and stability is an urgent global need. This calls for newer avenues of cooperation and collaboration. 
I believe BRICS can answer this call. This I do because of the uniqueness of BRICS as an international institution. For the first time it brings together a group of nations on the parameter of ‘future potential’; rather than existing prosperity or shared identities. The very Idea of BRICS is thus forward-looking. 
I therefore believe it can add fresh perspectives and mechanisms, to existing international institutions. 
Thus, we must ensure that the future development of our partnerships, and institutions, stays true to this original idea. 
BRICS must provide a united and clear voice in shaping a peaceful, balanced and stable World. 
We should intensify our cooperation in confronting global challenges; like Terrorism, Cyber Security and Climate Change. 
BRICS must also play a proactive role in shaping the global discourse on Growth and Development. This includes shaping the post-2015 Development Agenda to keep the central focus on tackling Poverty. 
We must seek urgent reforms of global institutions of governance like the UN Security Council and international financial institutions. 
We must help shape the WTO regime. An open trading regime is critical for strong, balanced and sustainable global economic growth. 
This must address the development aspirations of the developing world. 
It must also accommodate the special needs of the weak especially in areas such as Food Security. 
Excellencies, BRICS has gained enough horizontal influence to compel the world to take notice. Our own greater good, however, lies more in deepening our bonds vertically. 
This is why I have spoken on decentralizing this powerful forum in our earlier deliberations. We must proactively move beyond being Summit-centric. 
We must champion Sub-national Level exchanges. Champion engagement between our States, Cities and other local bodies. 
BRICS should in fact, be driven by ‘People to People’ contact. Our Youth in particular must take a lead in this. BRICS should explore developing innovative mechanisms of Youth engagement. A possible initiative, could focus on nurturing Innovation, by establishing a BRICS Young Scientists’ Forum. 
Another possibility, could be the setting up of BRICS language schools; offering language training in each of our languages. 
We could, also consider establishing, Massive Open Online Courses, for making quality education, accessible to all. 
We could also explore setting up a BRICS University. This would connect campuses in each of our countries; virtually, as well as through intensive student, faculty and research collaboration. 
Excellencies, I am convinced that each of us can succeed more by working together more closely. 
We must harness each other’s strengths, in knowledge, skills and resources. 
We must evolve mechanisms to share our experiences, innovations and technology. Numerous avenues can be explored, such as: 
• Sharing our experiences on development of affordable and reliable Clean Energy technologies.
• Harnessing advanced technology, like satellite communication, to make quality Health and Education more accessible. 
• Developing a Framework for promoting Tourism among BRICS countries. 
• Sharing experiences on Disaster Management, and 
• Collaboration and Competitions in Sports 
Excellencies, Economic forces are becoming increasingly important in global relationships. Domains like; Trade, Tourism, Technology, Tradition and Talent; have the power, to redefine existing paradigms. 
Each of us in BRICS brings a unique blend of experience and resources. We represent four continents. Each one of us enjoys comparative advantages and complementary strengths. BRICS should develop mechanisms to harness the same; for furthering our combined as well as individual good. Great work has already been done in this domain. 
The vision of a New Development Bank, at the Delhi Summit two years ago, has been translated into a reality, in Fortaleza. It will benefit BRICS nations. But will also support other developing nations. And, it will be rooted in our own experiences, as developing countries. 
The BRICS Contingent Reserve Arrangement gives BRICS nations a new instrument for safeguarding their economic stability. This is an important initiative at a time of high volatility in global financial markets. 
The MoU on Cooperation between Export Credit Guarantee Agencies, and the inter-Bank Cooperation Agreement on Innovation are other tangible steps that will spur cooperation among BRICS countries. 
I believe we have now reached a level where we should be even more ambitious.We should focus on more such tangible mechanisms and outcomes. Make BRICS a platform of Impact. 
Excellencies, we have an opportunity, to define the future – of not just our countries, but the world at large. Coming from a land where the idea of Vasudhaiva Kutumbakam - the ‘whole world being one family’ - is rooted deep in our ethos; I take this is as a great responsibility. 
Our steps must reinforce the hopes, aspirations and confidence, of the developing world. 
Once again, I thank President Rousseff and the wonderful people of Brazil, for hosting this Summit.
#DELIMITER#
16 7 2014, Brazil
BRICS Business Council
Excellencies, 
Distinguished members of the Business Council 
Ladies and Gentlemen,
I believe, economic forces are becoming increasingly important in global relationships. 
Domains like Trade, Technology, Tourism, Talent and Tradition have the power to redefine existing paradigms. 
I am thus pleased, that we established, the BRICS Business Council, in Durban, last year.
It is important, that our business leaders lead the effort in promoting trade, investment and manufacturing ties, among our countries.
I appreciate the work done by the Council.
Various enabling agreements, and MoUs; have already been signed between BRICS Development Banks, to promote intra-BRICS trade and investment. 
I would suggest the Business Council work in close coordination with the Development Banks, and, the Contact Group on Trade and Investment Issues. 
The suggestions presented in the Annual Report are important. The Council should work closely with BRICS Sherpas to see how these suggestions can be taken forward.
I am also happy to note that the Council has gone beyond BRICS to make concrete proposals for contributing to the growth, and development of the larger African region.
India remains committed to partnering with African countries in their developmental initiatives.
I once again, express my appreciation for the good work that has been done.
#DELIMITER#
15 7 2014, Brazil
BRICS Summit, Sustainable development and growth
The global economic environment remains uncertain and challenging. Recovery is still fragile despite improved prospects. 
In an environment of political conflict and persisting weakness in major economies; we have to be watchful for signs of a new bout of financial turmoil. 
Developments in Iraq and the wider region could affect this. I am also concerned that tight monetary policies in some countries couldundercut investment and growth in ours.
An open, rule-based, international trading regime is critical for global economic growth.
It must address the aspirations of the developing world. 
It must also accommodate the special needs of the most vulnerable sections of our societies, especially in areas such as food security. 
This is our broad expectation from the negotiations in the Doha Round of WTO. 
Excellencies, 
The Agreement towards setting up the BRICS New Development Bank is a significant step. I am happy, the initiative announced at the BRICS Summit in New Delhi in 2012, has become a reality. 
The agreement on the BRICS Contingent Reserve Arrangement is another major achievement. 
I compliment our Finance Ministers for concluding these two initiatives so quickly. 
These initiatives are rooted in our own experience as developing countries. 
They show our capacity to set up global institutions. 
They will open new avenues for supporting development in our countries as well as helping other developing nations. 
We should ensure these institutions establish a new model for supporting growth and stability. 
Excellencies, the theme of this Summit is also the guiding principle of my Government. For us, inclusion is a special challenge and responsibility; given our vast social, regional and economic diversity.
Our policies will focus on empowering people with skills and opportunities.
We will invest heavily in infrastructure, affordable housing, healthcare,education and clean energy.
We will harness all possibilities that advanced technologies open up.
All this will require fast-tracking of Growth. 
We will champion, clean and frugal resource use; to maintain the Sustainabilityof our development process, without constraining our growth. 
Sustainability has in fact been a core element of the Indian way of life. As Mahatma Gandhi had said, the World has enough, for everyone’s Need, but not for everyone’s Greed. We can all partake of the bounty of nature. However, exploitation of nature is a crime.
We have made progress, on the Millennium Development Goals. But widespread poverty still haunts us. 
We must keep poverty eradication at the centre of the post-2015 Development Agenda. 
It is important to shape the global discourse on the same, especially in forums like the UN. BRICS can be a major voice on the world stage to build consensus towards such efforts.
Excellencies, 
BRICS is in a position today where it wields enough horizontal influence to compel the world to take notice.
Our own good, however, lies in deepening our bonds vertically. 
We must focus on further decentralizing, this powerful forum. 
We must go beyond Summit and Leader-centric deliberations; and champion Sub-national Level exchanges. We must encourage engagement between our States, Cities and other local bodies. 
BRICS should in fact be truly driven by ‘People to People’ contact. Our Youth, in particular, must take a lead in this. 
Popularizing our languages through dedicated BRICS language schoolsin all BRICS countries could be a beginning in this direction. 
We could also consider establishing Massive Open Online Courses for making quality education accessible to all.
We could even explore the idea of a BRICS University. 
Today, technology is a transformative toolin every area of social and economic development. 
The vast pool of talent in BRICS could be combined to cooperate in areas like: health, education, agriculture, resource management and urban development. 
Perhaps a Young Scientists’ Forum of BRICS Countries could be explored.
Other initiatives could include: 
An affordable healthcare platform of BRICS nations. 
Mechanism to further cooperation, between our Small and Medium enterprises.
And, a common framework for promoting Tourism among BRICS countries.
I am aware of the comprehensive proposals that our Chinese and Russian partners have put forward to deepen BRICS cooperation. 
Our Sherpas should examine them urgently.
Let us deepen our bonds to make BRICS a stronger instrument of progress, for all mankind.
Thank you
#DELIMITER#
14 6 2014, India
Dedication of INS Vikrmaditya to country
My greetings to all my beloved fellow countrymen who have dedicated their lives protecting our great country India! I have come out of Delhi for the first time as a Prime Minister and have come directly to you. I believe this will help you understand the priorities of the new government. 
To ensure that our country supersedes the new heights set for development, to ensure that the poorest of the poor live with happiness and peace and the single most important pre-condition is that India should be safe. And for this safety the biggest driving force are the armed forces be it the Army, the Navy or the Air Force. It is the ability, sacrifice and dedication of our soldiers that ensures a peaceful sleep to the 125 crore Indians. In today’s scenario, the armed forces have undergone sea change. Modern technology has become an important component in the field of security. Hence for a nation to be equipped with the most advanced defence technologies and armaments is as important as the pooling up of dedicated, talented and courageous souls in its armed forces. Today is an important day in the history of India’s security and through our Navy that this golden chapter is being added to it. 
Vikramaditya is being dedicated to the soldiers of the Navy. A new and important step is getting imprinted in India’s security. The common man of the country would not be able to comprehend the importance of Vikramaditya as this is not his domain but to those soldiers of the Navy, who have decided to dedicate their lives for the Mother India, very well know and understand the potential of Vikramaditya. It is a matter of great pride and happiness for me that I have the opportunity of being amongst you in this historical moment when Vikramaditya is being inducted to the fleet, to be able to understand its potential and strength and also to take pride in India’s valour. 
The Navy has won accolades in many fields. In the entire history of mankind, Shivaji was the first person to float the concept of a naval force and its basic association was less with war. Its main aim was to protect the ships going for International trade and it was Shivaji’s dream that India should become a powerful country in world trade. Hence he thought of protecting the individuals involved in trade and with this the concept of a naval force came into existence centuries ago. Today, naval forces have become very important for all those countries having long coastlines or who are close to the sea. The competition in modern science and technology has also become equally important. The Navy has adopted the methodology of ‘Indigenous Technology’, the scientists from our very own India in conjunction with the inputs from Navy slowly developed ‘Indigenous Technology’ and has entered in the field of strategic warfare and in the very near future we plan to take it forward. 
We have to come out of the situation very soon when a country like India still imports defence equipments even after so many years of Independence. India has to move forward in the field of self-sufficiency in defence offset production and India should become a hub of such equipment for smaller nations of the world. The smaller nations should have faith that they have reliable defence equipment made in India by the Indian youth. We should move forward with the dream that smaller nations should be inculcated the faith that they will never accept defeat. 
The talent, innovation, research, technological upgradation capabilities of the Indian youth coupled with our strong deterrence will make us an unbeatable power and no one will dare to undermine us. The safety of the nation is associated not only with the soldiers of all the three forces but also with the temperament of the people in power. India neither wants to undermine any country’s sovereignty nor are we going to live with heads bowed down. We may be a very strong nation, but we do not intend to threaten anyone, rather we wish to move together. At the same time we are not ready to bow down and the Indian government has the capability to see anyone in the eye and make its point. And at the root cause of this courage is the preparation and courage of our soldiers and that gives us this strength. 
Today, I had the chance to see this huge development meant for our defence forces. For hours, I have been looking at this ship from every angle - from top to bottom and from right to left. I have been told that more than 1600 soldiers have been deployed on it simultaneously. Our air fleet will be able to take off and land from this ship. This is an important development from strategic point of view and today we have received an important gift. I offer my heartiest wishes to all the naval officers of the country. 
The preparation required on the coast is much more than the readiness required in the sea. Training of the citizens there is equally important for the help of the navy. A network of Naval NCC needs to be created in the coastal areas. Through the medium of Naval NCC, patriotic youth force can emerge as a powerful tool which can provide the navy with critical information and help from behind the scenes and we want to work in this direction in the near future. I would again like to give my good wishes to the soldiers of the Army, Navy and Air force on this pious occasion today. 
This new government has made some important decisions. For many years the soldiers have had a wish. I do not know why that task was not undertaken by the previous governments. May be it is my destined good fortune to do this good and holy task. And so this government has decided to create a National level War Memorial. The future generations may be reminded of those who in the post independence era laid down their lives for the country, which is why we have decided to take this step. 
One rank one pension has been a long battle, it has witnessed many ups and downs, many promises were made but the intention was never evident. This government just does not make promises, it has the intention to implement it too. We are committed to implement one rank one pension scheme. 
I again dedicate the Vikramaditya to the navy, which has sun like brightness in its name that inspires to win many a wars ahead. I wish that your life may be filled with the same brightness, valor and the conviction to be always victorious. 
Join me in saying, Bharat Mata Ki Jai!Bharat Mata Ki Jai!Bharat Mata Ki Jai!